
# Linus Torvalds: Linux succeeded thanks to selfishness and trust

By Leo Kelion Technology reporter

![Linus Torvalds](http://news.bbcimg.co.uk/media/images/60866000/jpg/_60866280_linus1.jpg)

Linus Torvalds developed Linux in 1991 while at the University of
Helsinki, Finland. He became a US citizen in 2010.

Linux creator Linus Torvalds has won the Millennium Technology
Prize and an accompanying cheque for 600,000 euros ($756,000;
Â£486,000) from the Technology Academy of Finland.

He was nominated for the award in recognition of the fact he had
created the original Linux operating system and has continued to
decide what modifications should be made to the Linux kernel - the
code that lets software and hardware work together.

Today a variety of Linux-based systems power much of the world's
computer servers, set-top boxes, smartphones, tablets, network
routers, PCs and supercomputers.

*Ahead of the announcement Mr Torvalds gave a rare interview to the BBC.*

**When you posted about the original system kernel on Usenet in 1991 what did you think would happen to it?**

I think your question assumes a level of planning that simply
didn't really exist. It wasn't so much about me having any
particular expectations of what would happen when I made the
original kernel sources available: a lot of the impetus for
releasing it was simply a kind of "hey, look at what I've done".

I was definitely not expecting people to help me with the project,
but I was hoping for some feedback about what I'd done, and looking
for ideas of what else people would think was a good idea.

**The success of Linux is in large part due to its open source nature. Why do you think people have been willing to give up so much time without financial reward?**

In many ways, I actually think the real idea of open source is for
it to allow everybody to be "selfish", not about trying to get
everybody to contribute to some common good.

In other words, I do not see open source as some big goody-goody
"let's all sing kumbaya around the campfire and make the world a
better place". No, open source only really works if everybody is
contributing for their own selfish reasons.

Now, those selfish reasons by no means need to be about "financial
reward", though.

The early "selfish" reasons to do Linux tended to be centred about
just the pleasure of tinkering. That was why I did it - programming
was my hobby - passion, really - and learning how to control the
hardware was my own selfish goal. And it turned out that I was not
all that alone in that.

Big universities with computer science departments had people who
were interested in the same kinds of things.

And most people like that may not be crazy enough to start writing
their own operating system from scratch, but there were certainly
people around who found this kind of tinkering with hardware
interesting, and who were interested enough to start playing around
with the system and making suggestions on improvements, and
eventually even making those improvements themselves and sending
them back to me.


And the copyright protected those kinds of people. If you're a
person who is interested in operating systems, and you see this
project that does this, you don't want to get involved if you feel
like your contributions would be somehow "taken advantage of", but
with the GPLv2 [licence], that simply was never an issue.

The fundamental property of the GPLv2 is a very simple
"tit-for-tat" model: I'll give you my improvements, if you promise
to give your improvements back.

It's a fundamentally fair licence, and you don't have to worry
about somebody else then coming along and taking advantage of your
work.

And the thing that then seemed to surprise people, is that that
notion of "fairness" actually scales very well.

Sure, a lot of companies were initially fairly leery about a
licence that they weren't all that used to, and sometimes doubly so
because some portions of the free software camp had been very
vocally anti-commercial and expected companies to overnight turn
everything into free software.

But really, the whole "tit-for-tat" model isn't just fair on an
individual scale, it's fair on a company scale, and it's fair on a
global scale.

Once people and companies got over their hang-ups - renaming it
"open source" and just making it clear that this was not some kind
of anti-commercial endeavour definitely helped - things just kind
of exploded.

And the thing is, if your competition doesn't put in the same kind
of effort that you do, then they can't reap the same kinds of
rewards you can: if they don't contribute, they don't get to
control the direction of the project, and they won't have the same
kind of knowledge and understanding of it that you do.

So there really are big advantages to being actively involved - you
can't just coast along on somebody else's work.

**7,800 developers across 80 countries contributed to the last version of the Linux kernel. But as it becomes more complex is there a danger it become less accessible for new people to get involved?**

So the kernel has definitely grown more complex, and certain core
areas in particular are things that a new developer should
absolutely not expect to just come in and start messing around
with.

People get very nervous when somebody they don't see as having a
solid track record starts sending patches to core - and complex -
code like the VM subsystem.

So it's absolutely much harder to become a core developer today
than it was 15 years ago.

At the same time, I do think it's pretty easy to get into kernel
development if you don't go for the most complex and central parts
first. The fact that I do a kernel release roughly every three
months, and each of those releases generally have over 1,000 people
involved in it, says that we certainly aren't lacking for
contributors.

**You have previously mentioned that you can't check that all the code that gets submitted will work across all hardware - how big an issue is trust in an open source project like this?**

Oh, trust is the most important thing. And it's a two-way street.

It's not just that I can trust some sub-lieutenant to do the right
thing, it's that they in turn can trust me to be impartial and do
the right thing.

We certainly don't always agree, and sometimes the arguments can
get quite heated, but at the end of the day, you may not even
always like each other, if you can at least trust that people
aren't trying to screw you over.

And this trust issue is why I didn't want to ever work for a
commercial Linux company, for example.

I simply do not want people to have even the appearance of bias - I
want people to be able to trust that I'm impartial not only because
they've seen me maintain the kernel over the years, but because
they know that I simply don't have any incentives where I might
want to support one Linux company over another.

These days, I do work full-time on Linux, and I'm paid to do it,
but that didn't happen until I felt comfortable that there was a
way that could be pretty obviously neutral, through a industry
non-profit that doesn't really sell Linux itself.

And even then, in order to allay all fears, we actually made sure
that my contract explicitly says that my employment does not mean
that the Linux Foundation can tell me what to do.

So exactly because I think these kinds of trust issues are so
important, I have one of the oddest employment contracts you've
ever heard of.

It's basically one paragraph talking about what I'm supposed
to do - it basically boils down to the fact that everything I do has to
be open source - and the rest of the contract is about all the ways
that the company I work for cannot influence me.

"Trust" is not about some kind of absolute neutrality, or anything
like that, but it's about a certain level of predictability and
about knowing that you won't be shafted.

**Linux is popular in many areas of computing including smartphones and servers, but it has never had quite the same breakthrough on desktops - do you think it will ever happen?**

So I think that in order to make it in a consumer market, you
really do need to be pre-installed. And as Android has shown, Linux
really can be very much a consumer product. So it's not that the
consumer market itself would necessarily be a fundamentally hard
nut to crack, but the "you need to come preinstalled" thing is a
big thing.

And on the laptop and desktop market, we just haven't ever had any
company making that kind of play. And don't get me wrong - it's not
an easy play to make.

That said, I wouldn't dismiss it either. The whole "ubiquitous web
browser" thing has made that kind of consumer play be more
realistic, and I think that Google's Chrome push (Chromebox and
Chromebooks) is clearly aiming towards that.

So I'm still hopeful. For me, Linux on the desktop is where I
started, and Linux on the desktop is literally what I still use
today primarily - although I obviously do have other Linux devices,
including an Android phone - so I'd personally really love for it
to take over in that market too.

But I guess that in the meantime I can't really complain about the
successes in other markets.

**Steve Ballmer once described Linux as a "cancer", but in recent months we've heard that Microsoft is running its Skype division off Linux boxes, and it's now offering a Linux-based version of its Azure cloud service - does this give you satisfaction?**

Well, let's say that I'm relieved that Microsoft seems to have at
least to some degree stopped seeing Linux as the enemy. The whole
"cancer" and "un-American" thing was really pretty embarrassing.

**The recent launch of the Raspberry Pi, running on Linux, has attracted a lot of attention. Are you hopeful it will inspire another generation of programmers who can contribute to the Linux kernel?**

So I personally come from a "tinkering with computers" background,
and yes, as a result I find things like Raspberry Pi to be an
important thing: trying to make it possible for a wider group of
people to tinker with computers and just playing around.

And making the computers cheap enough that you really can not only
afford the hardware at a big scale, but perhaps more important,
also "afford failure".

By that I mean that I suspect a lot of them will go to kids who
play with them a bit, but then decide that they just can't care.

But that's OK. If it's cheap enough, you can afford to have a lot
of "don't cares" if then every once in a while you end up
triggering even a fairly rare "do care" case.

So I actually think that if you make these kinds of platforms cheap
enough - really "throw-away cheap" in a sense - the fact that you
can be wasteful can be a good thing, if it means that you will
reach a few kids you wouldn't otherwise have reached.

**You work from home - how hard is it to avoid being distracted by family life and focusing on what must be very abstract concepts?**

Oh, I'm sure it can be hard for some people. It's never been a
problem for me.

I've always tended to find computers fascinating, often to the
point where I just go off and do my own thing and am not very
social.

Having a family doesn't seem to have made that character trait
really any different.

I'll happily sit in front of the computer the whole day, and if the
kids distract me when I'm in the middle of something, a certain
amount of cursing might happen.

In other words: what could be seen as a socially debilitating
failure of character can certainly work to your advantage too.


----

13 June 2012 Last updated at 01:23

----

[original article](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-18419231)
